# Elefant

[Elefant](http://www.elefantcms.com/) is an MVC framework in PHP re-imagined, with a complete but
refreshingly simple CMS included. Elefant is based on 12 years of programming
in PHP and running a monolithic CMS project [www.sitellite.org](http://www.sitellite.org/)
that despite its growing 12 years of cruft, did get a few key things right
that I haven't seen elsewhere. This is my attempt at taking those things
and starting fresh.

Elefant doesn't look much like other PHP-based MVC frameworks, but
I've never been able to stomach the disconnect they have with the language
itself. PHP isn't the most elegant language, and MVC constructs used in other
languages feel clunky when translated into it. But if we flip it around and
play on PHP's strengths, we get something much more natural to code with in
our little monster of a "hypertext preprocessor" ;)

## What's Missing

This is a simple framework, but it is very capable and provides everything
you need in a core MVC framework, including the core CMS features needed
to get a working website up in minutes. There are lots of things I tried to leave
out to keep things simple, and some things that I'm sure will appear down
the road. If something you need is missing and you feel it might fit as
part of the core framework, feel free to contribute!

Elefant apps are self-contained, so you can also make reusable apps and share
them with others as well.

For ideas on missing pieces and the future of Elefant,
see the [Future page on the wiki](https://github.com/jbroadway/elefant/wiki/Future).

## What's Here

* Really simple URL routing w/ friendly URLs
* Secure database abstraction/modeling (based on PDO)
* Compiled templates with output filtering *on* by default
* Memcache integration
* Flexible input validation (server-side and in-browser)
* Simple form handling
* Customizable user authentication
* Internationalization/localization
* CLI support for background tasks
* As little scaffolding as possible
* Reusable apps for common CMS tasks (admin, users, blog, filemanager, search)
* [High quality developer docs](https://github.com/jbroadway/elefant/wiki)
* Near 100% unit test coverage
* Gzip output compression
* [Speed](https://github.com/jbroadway/elefant/wiki/Performance). Less cruft, faster pages.

Request routing is where Elefant really stands out. A handler is simply a
PHP script and mapping is automatic. You can write your handlers just like
you would any other PHP script, starting at the top and using echo when you
want to output something. At the end, they're handled properly and inserted
into the right template for you. Just like that.

## Why?

Because after all these years, and after writing a lot of code in a lot of
different languages, I still don't mind PHP. It's a good tool for getting
certain jobs done quickly, and for me this helps make it a little easier/less
painful. Hopefully it helps others do the same.

I also wanted a clean start, not being tied to supporting older versions of
PHP and a ton of legacy code that users depended on. This means I can choose
more elegant and efficient ways of solving things, and learn from past
mistakes/luck and do it even better this time.

## Getting Started

1. Download the latest from GitHub: http://github.com/jbroadway/elefant

2. Unzip into a site root (no sub-folders, use sub-domains instead).

3. Run the following command or change the permissions on folders
`conf`, `cache`, `css`, `files`, `install`, and `layouts` recursively
to `0777` via FTP.

    `chmod -R 777 conf cache css files install layouts`

4. Go to `/install/` on your site to run the web-based installer. This will
guide you through the rest of the process.

### Optional command-line install method

If you're looking to automate installations, a web installer isn't the way
to go. Here are the steps to run the command line installer instead of step 4
above:

1. Edit `conf/config.php` and add your database connection info and default
site info.

2. Run the command `php conf/createdb.php` to create the default database tables
for the built-in apps. This will output an initial username and password for
you to use in the admin area.

## Next Steps

1. Now go to your site and see that it worked. You should see a basic website and
welcome page if all went well.

2. Go to `/admin` and you can log in with the username and password you chose in
the web installer, or that was generated by the command line installer.

3. Edit `layouts/default.html` and add your site stylings.

4. Create an app using the command `php conf/make.php myapp` and write some
models/handlers/views. Lather, rinse, repeat.

The GitHub page is the place to go for issues and info. You can also post questions
and other discussion about Elefant on our [discussion forum](http://www.elefantcms.com/forum/).

## Folder Layout

* .htaccess - rewrites and permissions for Apache
* apps - your apps go here
* cache - templates rendered to PHP
* conf - global configurations
* css - global CSS files
* files - files uploaded through the admin area
* index.php - the front-end controller, or request router
* install - the web-based installer
* js - global Javascript files
* layouts - design layouts
* lib - main libraries
* LICENSE - the MIT license info
* nginx.conf - rewrites and permissions for Nginx
* README.md - this file
* tests - unit tests

## Example Code

### 1. A basic handler: hello.php

	<?php echo 'Hello ' . $_REQUEST['name']; ?>

Save this to `apps/hello/handlers/index.php` and you can access it via `/hello` in your
browser.

### 2. Using URL components in handlers:

	<?php echo 'Hello ' . $this->params[0]; ?>

Now try calling that one via `/hello/world`. Extra values that didn't match the
handler is part of the `$controller->params` array for you.

### 3. Specifying an alternate template:

	<?php
	
	$page->template = 'alternate';
	
	echo 'Hello world';
	
	?>

I should mention, `$this` in a handler refers to the controller, although not
necessarily the global one (since handlers can call each other as well).

### 4. Defining extra variables for your template:

	<?php
	
	$page->title = 'My Page';
	$page->sidebar = 'Some sidebar content.';
	
	echo 'Regular output is the body content.';
	
	?>

Now in your template you can use `{{ title }}` and `{{ sidebar }}` just like
`{{ body }}` outputs the regular output.

### 5. From one handler to another:

	<?php
	
	$page->sidebar = $this->run ('myapp/sidebar');
	
	?>

Or from inside a template:

	<?php echo $controller->run ('myapp/sidebar'); ?>

## Code Conventions

I've chosen the following naming conventions for the core libraries:

* Classes start with capitals and use camel case.
* Methods and functions use underscores (like Ruby :)

I also use tabs instead of spaces, trailing braces instead of giving them
their own lines, and put a space before open braces and between operators,
for example:

	function foo_bar ($foo = false) {
		if (! $foo) {
			// etc.
		}
	}

Other than that, for documentation I use JavaDoc-style commenting and for
inline comments I use the double-slash.

## FAQ

Q. Do you know you spelt Elephant wrong?

A. This was my attempt at being hip and cool. No good?
